# Vasant Dhar on Thinking With Machines with Foster Provost

**Channel:** NYU Stern   |   **Date:** 2026-02-25   |   **URL:** https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aa-0S60EAPk

## Description

On November 17, 2025, NYU Stern's Vasant Dhar launched his new book "Thinking With Machines: The Brave New World of AI." He joined Fubon Data Analytics & AI Director Foster Provost in conversation about AI’s progress and reversals, its promises and dangers, and what we need to address before the machine gets away from us. This fireside chat discussion also included a demonstration of the Damodaran Bot.

To learn more, please visit the Fubon Center's website: https://www.stern.nyu.edu/fubon.

## Transcript

I'm Arun Sundra Rajan. Um I'm the director of the Fubon Center for Technology, Business and Innovation. Um and I'm delighted to welcome you to um our latest um edition of uh the demystifying AI speaker series that is run by Foster Provost who runs the artificial intelligence and analytics um initiative of the Fubon Center. Um Foster is one of the world's experts on AI and machine learning. Um, and uh, you know, I strongly encourage you to go to the Fubon website and watch some of the earlier talks in the series cuz they're really precient about like, you know, what we're living through now, anticipating what uh, is going to come in the future and you'll see evidence of that through these conversations. And so um you know a lot of what's going to happen today is um preparing you for you know what's going to unfold over the next few years. Um I normally stop these introductions by introducing professor provost and then he introduces the speaker. Um but since the like you know the speaker whose book is coming out is Vasant Dar I just wanted to say a few words about Vasant. Um he's been a colleague for over 25 years. He's a very close friend. Um, you know, he's taught me a ton about artificial intelligence and um I think it's safe to say that without his advice and mentorship I would not have gotten tenure and I would not be here at NYU. So um eternally grateful to him for that. Um I'm really really excited that this book of his thinking with machines has come out. He he sort of really has a unique view on artificial intelligence that you're going to hear about. But um without further ado, over to you first and Vasant. >> Yeah. Well, thanks a lot Arun. Um yeah, thanks everyone for uh for being here. Um this is Vasant's book. Um this is the book launch party. Um uh so what we're going to do is um talk about the book, the ideas in the book. Um but part of the partly the book is um Vasant's uh refle part of the book is Vasant's reflections on his his own journey through the world of AI across many different sort of versions of the world of AI which we'll which we'll which we'll talk about. Um and I so I thought we could maybe um uh uh start things off uh maybe tell us uh a little bit about your journey especially the early stages in it. I think this is useful for us because it it provides a lot of context for where we are now with AI. Um and we'll move we won't stick spend the whole time on the old days but uh yeah so thank you for doing this. Um again by the way similar to Arun um I am here at NYU because of Vant. uh uh I I I joined uh back in 99 1999 but but you know sort of uh thanks to Vant maybe maybe we'll uh tell that story at some point but uh it's not necessary to understand uh his book >> well firstly thank you Foster for uh doing this thanks Arun and the Fubon Center and most of all for you all for being here I'm truly touched at seeing friends in the audience um you know including people who actually endorsed the book some of my, you know, early podcast guest, you know, John Ston, my friend who was an early guest on on Brave New World, the podcast. So, I want to thank you all for being here. Um, your to your question, Foster, you know, the line that comes to mind as a dead head is what a long strange trip it's been. Um and and it truly has and I'll unpack that as we go along because you know I got into AI by pure serendipity as a graduate student as a PhD student that was you know sitting in the computer center typing a program on punched cards and a senior doctoral student came by and said hey you know like Vasant you know come with me I want to get this professor to offer a course on AI and I said what is it you know what is AI and he said it's about getting computers to be smart and I said that sounds good to And we went up to the uh medical school at at the University of Pittsburgh. There was a lab on the top floor. And uh you know, while we were waiting for this professor, he was on the phone. I was watching the screen in the middle of the room and a physician with snow white hair, you know, and a cigar, puffing a cigar, talking to this system called Internist. Um in those days, people couldn't type. So he was talking and his assistant was typing. Um, and he was discussing a case with internist, a real case, and he was entering symptoms and the computer was coming back at him. Uh, and I was just watching this because I'd never seen a program do this. You know, I used it for solving engineering problems, but the notion of a of a computer talking to you was just foreign to me and I was just blown away by that. And at some point in the interaction um you know during the Q&A you know Myers Jack Myers with the physician he puffed his cigar and he said why are you ask me the question and the computer said because the evidence you've given me is consistent with the following hypothesis and this question will help me discriminate between the top two. And I was just blown away by that you know like how was a computer doing this? That just didn't seem like an ordinary program. This just seemed magical. And that was sort of my first foray to AI. And I was like, this is what I want to do with my life. So that was it. That was the aha moment for me was, you know, wow, there's a computer doing this. That was during the early days of expert systems. >> By the way, what year? Just for context. >> So this was 1979, right? Um where a physician was literally talking to a computer. And I start my book with that same interaction, right? in 1979 and later on in the book I have the same interaction with chat GPT right and what's amazing is that they are remarkably similar right so this notion that AI has emerged in the last two years which most people seem to think is just you know fiction I mean AI has been around since 1956 you know there were people building really ambitious systems in the 60s the 70s and I'll say one thing the language of AI at the time was all about thinking, reasoning, understanding, planning, right? This was part of the vocabulary of AI. So, our aspirations were really high even back then, even though the tools didn't quite support it, but we didn't know any better, right? We thought we had the tools and we had the means to actually build these really intelligent and sophisticated applications, right? And we sort of chugged along, but that approach ran into a wall. you know there there was some serious problems with expecting human experts like Jack you know Meyers to specify knowledge and by the way internist had been built over 10 years of really painstaking effort of talking to experts analyzing the responses use cases all that kind of stuff. So you know we ran into this sort of a wall and guess what machine learning came along because data had started becoming available. So people said why don't we just get the machine to learn the medical knowledge from data right why go through this cumbersome process of talking to experts let's just learn it all right because data has started becoming available and that was a major step forward and that's sort of when I pivoted into machine learning in the early 90s um and then I went to Wall Street you know I brought machine learning to Wall Street in 1994 people weren't thinking about this then but to me it was the obvious way forward and and by the way I'll roll back 15 years before that with Herb Simon who was a you know one of the you know fathers of the field and he'd convinced me that it was just around the corner right and there was a Nobel laureate telling me oh this is around the corner so I believed him around the corner for him and 10 years in reality it took 30 or 40 what's the difference right in the larger scheme of things right so it's been a progression you know and then we get you know but then Machine learning sort of also had problems. You had to do feature engineering and that was cumbersome and then deep learning came along you know pioneered by some of our colleagues including Yan Lun that moved intelligence upstream because now the machine could perceive the world directly just like we could. Um major step forward what got him the Turing award. Um but what seems magical now is the GPT moment right the chat GPT moment of November 2022. And I think people will think of the world as pre- chat GPT and post chat GPT, right? And that for most people was the magical moment, right? So, but some of the old problems from sort of the old days of AI still exist and modern AI has created some new problems for us which I'm sure we'll talk about. >> Yeah. Great. So um by the way Vant and I have this bizarly par these bizarrely parallel uh careers. Um so he was working at the University of Pittsburgh under uh Harry Popel who was one of the sort of fathers of medical expert systems. Turned out that I did my uh u graduate work under Bruce Buchanan at the University of Pittsburgh, the other of the two fathers of medical expert systems. Yeah. And I uh I brought my book from my first class AI class from the '8s. >> It looks old, doesn't it? >> Rule. Yeah, it's even kind of dingy yellow now. Uh rule-based expert systems. I mean, the amazing thing is is if you go in there and you like read chapter after chapter, there's all this stuff in there that you're like, we don't even still do that now, you know, and stuff, you know, and stuff like that with with modern AI, which I think which I think we're talking about. >> That's right. I mean there's stuff explanation >> three chapters on explanation you know sort of explainable AI you know the book was written in the early 80s based on work done in the 70s you know um you know and so that you know have all this stuff on by the way and then uh we both uh did our um graduate uh took our graduate AI classes at Carnegie Melon under Simon and some of the other experts Alan Newell and for me Tom Mitchell was was was there we both took our first jobs in industry in 1994 for you know building machine learning based systems you know we're both at NYU now so uh I didn't know some of that until I read the book I knew I knew some of the other part especially the stuff that's what I did um so um yeah so um I thought getting back to you and your book um I thought something that we could do would be to talk a little bit about what is different today versus what isn't different today because a lot of this sort of comes out you know comes out through the book. So you want to pick some some things that aren't a couple things that aren't different and a couple things that are different and we can talk a little bit about them. >> Yeah. So so let me just preface that by the following sort of observation which I didn't sort of fully complete in my preamble. Um so I I sort of skipped over this sort of transition from deep learning to what I call general intelligence. Right? So there was this progression from sort of expert systems to machine learning to deep learning where where the machine sort of started sensing things directly especially in vision and sound you know but that's just sort of the beginning you know now we're getting into smell and two of my smell collaborators Dimma and and Vive are in the audience you know where we're getting computers to actually try and sort of perceive smell as well right so this whole sort of moving of intelligence upstream really opened the floodgates to intelligence right because you didn't need to specify much as much the machine could perceive and then I talked about the pre the post sort of the chap the post chap GPT chapter which is what we're in now which I call general intelligence right so your question really is what's fundamentally different about modern AI relative to sort of the previous paradigms right that's you know that have led up to this so What's not different first? So, what's not different is the hype, right? Ultra hype, right? What's not different? By the way, ultra hype. I have a little clipping somewhere from the 80s that I clipped out of a newspaper and I saved it where they were looking for AI experts in the you sort of classified ads in the newspaper. It was so hyped in the 80s and they were looking for AI experts >> and but now it's like orders of magnitude larger, right? There's huge amount amounts of investment going into AI. If you've got an idea, people are throwing money at you, right? So, so that you know that's not different. It's just much larger, right? So, there's there are similarities, right? But let's look at like what's fundamentally different, right? There's a couple of ways to look at this. One is everyone can now relate to AI, right? Everyone is pretty much everyone is using it, right? They we can all identify with it, right? So it's become sort of this generalpurpose technology that everyone can use and that's different. So it's moved from being an application like a niche sort of application thing to to a general purpose technology that now is beginning to to pervade everything and it's going to have like massive impacts >> and that's because of >> what? Well, it's because of a number of things, but fundamentally it's because the distinction between expertise and common sense has dissolved. Right? This was one of the thorniest problems of AI, right? Where we said, you know what, common sense is too hard. Let's just hold that off for for the moment. Let's focus on expertise, right? >> And just a a little vignette here. So in 1989 I spent six months in Austin, Texas at a lab called MCC, Micro Electronics Computer Consortium. It it was the US fifth generation project, right? And there were two major groups there. There was a reasoning architecturalist group which is what I was part of. But then there was another group called Psych CYC headed by a visionary called Doug Lennon. And Leonard's vision of AI was let's teach the computer common sense, right? And I remember talking to people who carried business cards saying knowledge enterer. I'm not making this up. >> Yeah. The DoD spent >> tens of millions of dollars on entering common sense into a big common sense knowledge base. And I hope I'm not being overly uncharitable when I say this, but I'll say that the whole endeavor was a colossal flop, right? We just could not teach the machine common sense. And I'd ask these people, "What do you do all day?" And they say, "Well, you know, we teach the computer that when you go to a restaurant, it's customary to leave a tip." You know, stuff like that. And I was like, "This is insane, right? How will this ever work?" You know, and it didn't work. >> Is look before you leap common sense? Well, >> what about >> what about he who hesitates is lost? Exactly. Apherisms, right? All of this sort of common sense, right? >> So, that didn't work. Well, the thing about chat GPT is that and and modern AI and and what I call general intelligence is that we're now in an era where the machine knows something about everything, right? You can ask it anything. it'll tell you something even if it doesn't know that much right but it but in theory it knows something about everything and that's been a gamecher right that is there's no sort of demarcation between expertise and common sense it just flows into each other it's just melts into each other >> right so I think we have um as as far as what's different right I mean common sense is definitely way way different psych was supposed to be the answer and it just flopped, right? And now we have answer. I think this um I like the idea of the demarcation the demarcation between expertise and common sense is gone, right? Because um you know it basically it's just because there really is none. >> Yeah. I mean you know basically and you know there there just is none. And so the so that has been smoothed out with problems because the expert system world was focused on it being right. Right. GPT there's no focus. I mean there's no there's well no there you know there is some but we don't even know how to train models to be right like we just they're just right because they happen to be you know happen to be right you know um and um the third I think is just the facility of its natural language capabilities which is maybe a smaller increment from from before because large language models have been around for since the turn of the century but they just you know you know with the introduction you know, the trans um transformer architecture, they just were able to be trained on so much more data that they just got. >> Yeah. And and and in a sense like common sense and and sort of the natural language thing are sort of two sides of the same coin, right? You you can't have one without the other. I mean, to be able to express common sense, you sort of need language, right? You need to be able to say things. In the old days, if you said something that the machine didn't understand, guess what came back at you, right? Something like bad command or file name, right? And that was the end of it, right? It didn't degrade gracefully. You know, now you tell it something, it throws something back at you and you say, "Well, no, that's not what I meant. I meant something quite different, you know, something a little bit different." It says, "Okay, I get it." Right? And that's common sense, right? It knows that it's wrong. It knows what you want. It knows what you mean, right? And and I'm I'm I'm saying mean in quotes because u because I'm aware of the fact that some people will say, "Well, it doesn't really understand anything, right?" But that's being a little extreme, right? >> What about the relationship to truth? >> Uhhuh. >> That seems to have degraded substantially with modern AI over kind of old school AI. >> Yes. I mean, you know, truth has been a casualty, you know, on the march to intelligent machines, as I say it, because, you know, one of the things we've done is we've sort of created these machines to be more like us. And that's great, but they've inherited some of our tendencies as well, such as to lie, to deceive, right? And truth maybe as well, you know, to bend things, you know, at the edges. And one of the things we don't really know is what all have the language models really learned. We just don't know because what we get is something that's acceptable, right? These language models have been beaten over the head by humans using what's called reinforcement learning human feedback because guess what? These language models have learned all kinds of things, all kinds of dark sides about humanity. But we just don't want those to surface because that would be tremendously disruptive, right? So companies like OpenAI and operators of the chatbot have have hired armies of people to beat the machine over the head into submission to say things that are acceptable to us and hopefully truthful as well. Right? So truth and that's what I mean by a casualty or an afterthought. Right? So in modern AI machines are designed to make sense. Right? that is their their interactions with us are meant to make sense but there's nothing there about truth at all right truth is an afterthought and we expect them to be truthful but that but that's not what they're designed to be >> yeah and so people like to say I mean I'm sure you all have said this right that oh well chacha hallucinates sometimes it doesn't hallucinate it makes stuff up but it makes everything up right it's not like oh once in a while it makes stuff up The way it works is it makes stuff up some the remarkable thing isn't sometimes it gets things wrong. The remarkable thing is how often it's right you know I mean that's that's really the remarkable thing that's really what's amazing. Yeah. And so so Van has this discussion in in the book about um so Van has written elsewhere but it's also in the book this notion that he has just gone through of the paradigm shifts in AI right so the notion of the paradigm shift is from Thomas Coon's famous um essay on the structure of scientific revolutions and so Vant tells a story um I don't know how true it is but it's told it in the book uh about going and asking chat GPT like well where did the you know where did the uh uh where was the word paradigm used in English you sort before that and it just kept making stuff up, right? You know, so I had I I um I read that and I'm like, well that's really interesting because actually in my PhD thesis I had written about Thomas Coons work and paradigm shifts and I knew that paradigm had the word had a long history in the English language and you know was even back in this uh um like 17th century poem by Henry Moore and you know and stuff like that and I vaguely I still my mind's still working all these years later. Um, so I went to chatb myself and it just made stuff up and it wouldn't it didn't know this. It didn't know this. And I'm like, "How about this?" And I put like a couple lines from the poem and it's like, "No, no one's ever said that." And I'm like, "How about Henry Moore?" And it finally is like, "Oh, yes, that's from the poem such and such, you know, by Henry Moore, right?" And so, I mean, it's >> and by the way, you know, >> truth is, you know, truth is, you know, you know, >> I believe that's the truth because I've actually read that in the poem by Henry Moore. By the way, the one of the larger points you're getting at here and this is also something I talk about in the book is that um I think there's sort of a impending bifurcation of humanity that is in my mind happening already and that is that the more you know the more the AI can amplify what you know right and I'm seeing this right because if you can actually look at its response and say no that's or yes that's right or that's interesting and nudge it in a different direction. It's a a tremendously powerful storehouse of information and also of reasoning and I know people in let's say biology who are learning something about chemistry about physics you know that's relevant to them because they already have the chops to understand what it's telling them and you know and whether it's telling something interesting truthful um as opposed to people who use it as a crutch who accept its response and and take it as a given right so the ability to discriminate is essential. The ability to sort of exercise that mental muscle is essential. And I think AI can help people do that. On the other hand, it can do also just the opposite. And in some ways, I feel like, you know, my spatial capabilities have deteriorated since I have started using maps. You know, I mean, you know, I was in fact I was heading down to, you know, down to lower Manhattan the other day, you know, and I've done that countless times, you know, without maps. For some reason, I started using maps and before I knew it, I was lost. I was like, "What the hell is going on here?" You know, and and so it has that ability or that the the potential to actually lead to cognitive decline if you don't actually exercise your muscle, right? And that's sort of what I see happening already. >> So, I'm going to nudge us in a particular direction. Um I wanted to talk a little about agentic AI, right? because um obvious to everybody, you know, um AI agents, nothing particularly new about that. And secondly, what people sort of call agentic systems very often are just um AI systems that have multiple different components in them that then work together. But real AI systems pretty much always have have had that, right? yet still there is something um new about what is being done with a genetic AI systems and so I wonder if you tell us a little about Debbot. Well, so great segue, Foster. So, um, you know, there's a lot of hype these days and hope about agentic AI, right? That we are, uh, now we have these agents that will do stuff for us, right? We'll we'll we'll give them agency, right, to act on our behalf. Now the concept goes back way back to the 70s you know where we been where we've been trying to build these complex kind of systems and one of the efforts that I've been involved with with my colleague Xiao Sid Dog who's sitting back there is to build this system called the Damoderan bot. Now some of you might have heard of you know my colleague Aswat Damodan who's considered sort of the dean of valuation on Wall Street right he's one of the gurus of valuation so you know I went to Aswat in 2015 um one week and it was the same week that I had this conversation with uh Scott Galloway who's been kind enough to write the forward for my book and you know I'd spoken to uh Asat about sort of the possibility of maybe trying to replicate his thinking in a machine. And we talked about this and realized, no, it was going to be too hard, right? That his that it was just too much subtlety and judgment involved and that we wouldn't be able to do it. And I had a conversation with Scott Galloway that same week when we talked about, you know, because I've been working on machine learning and finance for a long time. I created a sort of machine learning based hedge fund in uh the late 90s, you know, still runs, still makes, you know, trading decisions. Um, and Scott ended the conversation with, okay, so there won't be any trading floors left, but private equity and venture capital safe. And I said, yeah, pretty much that's a human kind of thing. Now, I'm not so sure anymore, right? So um I started working with Xiao and with Aswat on building this thing called the Demoderin bot right we had no idea whether this would work. It was just a idea like after chat GPT the Modern sort of said to me he said you know what yeah this might be worth revisiting so we did revisit it >> and it's a multi- aent system it's a fairly complex and a sophisticated system and should we segue to a demo right all right so let's actually see how it works right so this is unusual for a book launch but what the hell So all right so um this is what the front end looks like right so you can say you know so we'll just go with uh Apple which um everyone knows about right so look up the company uh looks it up um and you know you can pick any publicly traded company right if it doesn't have the financials it'll go get it but just in the um you know for for the sake of time it has it and then it provides you an option. It says do you have a thesis on Apple right if you have a thesis you can express it or if you don't have one you can have the AI you guide the thesis and say well you generate the thesis right so you have this option I'm saying this because people have asked me how do you expect this tool to be used in reality and my thinking is that you know I I I think the way it'll be used is it'll enable analysts to do a lot more than they're able to do now, right? Imagine having the Mullerin at your fingertips, right? And saying, "Asw what what happens if you know the Trump administration decides to escalate the tariff war, right? How would that affect valuation?" And it's not just a question of like changing a bunch of numbers. It's a question of like rethinking the whole thesis, right? So um you know I I can say things like um you know you know assume that the Trump administration escalates the trade war China right oops you don't have to actually spell things right. >> Yeah. >> But but I should spell things right. >> You want to change the was to war. >> Yeah. >> Was war. Yeah. Was become >> trade wars. Yeah. That would be useful. Yeah. You know, although I would expect it to correct itself, right? Or know what you know. And maybe I should have China with a capital C. Whoops. Whoa. What did I do there? He should have some hate doing these deos typing for you. >> Yeah. Yeah. Or better still, maybe I should uh wear my reading glasses so I can see a little bit better. Right. So, you know, I say, "All right, do that." And um and then I say, you know, run the debot. Right? And off it goes. Right? So, it's so it's off to the races and it's doing its thing. And maybe 20 minutes later, I'll see a uh not maybe definitely there'll be a report in my inbox with a demo style report. Right. >> It has like a dozen different routines, different AI routines all working on different parts of the problem. Right. >> That's correct. Right. So, uh essentially what it'll do is um it, you know, it has Oops. Uh I opened up all these windows, right? So it has um a bunch of these uh agents doing its thing. And um you know, one of them is uh Asat's quantitative model called the Ginsu. You know, for reasons I won't describe. It's an amusing sort of background to that. uh you know but it also has other things like a uh an agent that looks for consensus or comparables uh you know an agent that writes the report another agent that critiques the report right so it's a fairly sophisticated architecture and that's why it takes like 15 20 minutes to run so there's a lot of stuff going on behind the scenes um but so this is a report that Xiao ran on October 7th right so this was like a little more than a month ago um and I've just sort of highlighted the interesting parts of the report. Right? So, this is uh it's saying, you know, I'm going to evaluate 117 a share relative to 257. And then it goes on and, you know, show, you know, this is a chart that it generated that I think is really cool. Um, you know, showing inflows and outflows and it focuses on its, you know, the iPhone, the services, the Mac, the iPad, etc. you know, not going to go through this all um and writes a, you know, five or six page report and concludes and also says, "Oh, by the way, Johnny IV, Apple's design soul, is now working with OpenAI on AI hardware. That's not a great sign." So, you know, it he is quote unquote he quote unquote he is generally bearish on Apple, right? So, this was something that Xiao ran in October. I ran the same thing today, right? So this is me running it. So this is Vasant's generated thesis which says assume that Trump will continue to impose heavy tariffs on China during his term in office. It takes that as in input and it says all right let's start with a basic number right um 147 billion that's the annual value of the products that Apple imports from China. Um, and a 60% tariff means that 88 billion is just like going up in smoke, right? Um, and since I nudged it in that direction, it does a slightly different analysis than what Xiao's thesis had done, which was, you know, focused on its products. This time it's saying that the killer here really is the margin compression, right? So, it's focusing on that part of the analysis. So, so because I turned its head in that direction and said, you know, focus on tariffs, right? And so it's focusing on tariffs across the board um you know and sort of doing its thing. Um and it's you know and then it's sort of you know doing this sort of discounted cash flow analysis and it's saying 95 is the value it comes up with based on this assumption of tariffs. Right? So these are two different thesis and it's not surprising that this one is lower than the one it generated earlier with Xiao's thesis, right? This one's like much more bearish trade wars escalate. I ran it again um this morning and this time this was with the AI generated thesis. So it did its own thing, right? it it generated the thesis on its own um and came up with you know a direction of its own and saying uh what emerges isn't the story of an in invincible empire but that of a luxury good company dancing on the edge of a paradigm shift valued as if tomorrow will always look like today. And then it goes on and says it comes up with $122 a share. Interestingly, you know, and and justifies it with a whole bunch of reasoning. Uh and let me just sort of I guess cut to the chase and see whether there's anything else it says. Uh oh, yeah. and and it talks about the services business which says um and the app store which says is a regulatory decision away from becoming 15% or 10% relative sort of to the 30% it charges currently. Um and then of course there's some Asswat sounding language there a middle school crush. Um and then interestingly it also makes an analogy with IBM in the 80s right saying that IBM was sort of similarly on the edge of a paradigm shift but completely unaware you know that that it was on this precipice right so it's relatively bearish on Apple now I'm not suggesting you all sell it because you know um a couple of months ago it was extremely bearish on Intel um and I sold Intel and regretted it. It's probably worth it's worth saying what uh Oswath admits himself to being the problem with his um valuebased uh um view if you're thinking about it as investment an investment strategy. >> Yeah. You know, I mean, look u you know, the Modern admits to getting a lot of these stories wrong, right? He got Tesla wrong initially, he got Facebook wrong. So, he tends to get some of these uh big growth stories wrong. Um, on the other hand, he gets a lot of things right as well. The question here isn't whether he's right or wrong or whether the the modern bot is right or wrong as much as the fact that it's a demonstration of an AI machine that actually thinks like um uh you know a respected valuation expert on Wall Street, right? And so in a sense we're almost back to the early you know to the 70s you know and the expert systems paradigm but now with a whole new set set of tools and this sort of paradigm of general intelligence where the machine has this common sense and an ability to reason about almost anything right and that's sort of you know where the real magic is in enabling uh people to do a lot more than they were able to do previously. Let me get back to truth because um just to push back a little on getting it wrong. You come up with a valuation and it's a lot lower than the stock price doesn't mean you're wrong. The stock could just be very you know sort of very overvalued. >> Yeah indeed. And you know as uh you know there's another I guess the Modern saying which is that when everyone agrees chances are everyone's wrong you know so disagreement is actually a a good sign. Should we resume? >> I'll go. >> By, >> by the way, I could do this all day and I I do spend a lot of time um you know, trying this out. And um you know, it's it's it's far from perfect, by the way. It does some dumb things every once in a while, you know, as you would expect an AI to do. Uh but then, you know, humans are no different, are we? So, one of the things I wanted to make sure that we not miss because we've talked about the past, um, we've been talking about the present and, you know, our new our new world of crazy, uh, maybe not so truthful, but very useful AI. Um, and so I thought, uh, you've got a lot in there on the on the future. Um and so um uh what about um oh one thing I want I >> Yeah. >> Did we really talk about this is this is relevant to the debot. This isn't what I was going to say but relevant to the debot like why should I trust him? >> That's what I thought you were going to ask me. >> Well because that's actually the right question. I just took me a while to get to it. So, you know, I spend a fair amount of time in the book talking about trust because that is one of the biggest uh open questions with AI like should you know when should be trusted and I started thinking about trust seriously about 15 years ago. uh you know and it it was because of this you know hedge fund that I had created and I was running or rather the machine was running and what I found really interesting was the fact that I was willing to trust this algorithm uh when it was wrong almost half the time right so you know my win rate was about 51 52 53% right it hovered in that range um and one of the things that people don't realize guys, is that all you need in finance anyway is just a slight edge. Just a very slight edge and then you sort of amplify it, right? The same thing happens in sports, right? To me, sports and finance are two sides of the same coin. Very competitive, you know, no one's like leaving anything on the table, right? You know, everyone's got the best equipment, the best people, you know, the best of everything, right? So, where's the edge? And the answer is there's very little edge, right? Um, and so that was my question, right? Why was I willing to trust the algorithm when it's wrong almost half the time? And the answer was because the consequences of error were relatively small, right? I mean, what can you know what's the worst that can happen? Well, you lose a little money, right? It's not the end of the world, right? Especially if you got lots of bets, right? If you got a hundred bets or 200 bets, you know, on a, you know, that you're taking on a on a day or thousands of bets, which is something I was doing when I did a lot of high frequency trading at one point. Um, you know, it it was literally a cash machine, right? I mean, I wouldn't have a losing day, you know, when when I was doing that. Now, unfortunately, uh, due to our, uh, Senator Chuck Schumer, who introduced this legislation called RENMS, it sort of wiped out my alpha overnight. uh which is what happens to high frequency strategies by the way right but the the point is that I was willing to trust the machine when it was wrong almost half the time and yet in healthcare and other areas where I had built applications I wasn't willing to trust the machine I wanted to talk to a human um and driverless cars you know those those things rarely make mistakes right vision technology is amazingly good very few errors is, but I still want to keep my hand on the wheel, right? I wasn't willing to trust a machine. Why was that? And when I thought about it, I realized that it was really because the consequences of error were high in medicine, much higher than they were in finance. And in driverless cars, they are potentially almost infinite, right? I mean, you lose your life, that's it. I mean, that's a huge cost of error. And I experienced that myself last year. I had a near-death experience on the Sawmill Parkway coming into the city 55 miles an hour. There's a stretch of lights. They were green. And suddenly I saw this vehicle in front of me t-boned it. And there was a sixth of a second from recognition to impact. I thought for sure I was dead. There's no way I'm getting out of it. But through some miracle, I mean, I guess it wasn't my time. uh the car sort of, you know, uh as my the car's computer later uh made evident. I had actually I didn't even have time to hit the brakes. It happened so quickly. I tried to swerve in desperation and the computer showed that I hit the other car at a twoderee angle and I was going at 53 miles an hour, three miles above the speed limit on the Sawmill Parkway. Um, and I survived. Um, now the other driver was an elderly person. I don't think she saw me coming. Um, you know, you know, may have had poor eyesight. I don't know. But that was one of those situations where I said, if she'd been in a driverless car, I don't think this would have happened. Right? That technology would have actually saved both of us, you know, a lot of trouble. the sensors would have seen me coming, you know, it wouldn't have happened. So trust is one of those really important and yet poorly understood areas when it comes to AI and it depends on, you know, the cost of error. And so the the modern bot to me is one of those things that lies on what I call the automation frontier, right? I wouldn't take its output and send it to a client or even invest in it. There's a lot of work involved, right? There were a lot of numbers in there, right? There there's charts and I found times when it's wrong, you know, it it tell you know even that number of like 147 billion, you know, worth of goods imported from China. Is that right? I haven't verified that. So a professional would actually need to look at this thing and make sure that the outputs are trustable. Right? So the debot is something that I say lies on that automation frontier. It's not good enough yet where you can say, "Yeah, just do it. I trust it." Like like my trading algorithm is, right? Where I'm not going to intervene, right? It it knows better than me what to do. I just trust it because it's predictable, right? It doesn't make too many m the cost of error is low even though it makes mistakes. Um so that's sort of my thinking of trust. So, by the way, I think it's worth for all of us to actually use um self-driving cars um as a framing for how we're thinking about AI these days. And here's why. 10 years ago, probably almost exactly 10 years ago, I did one of these demystifying AIs with um uh with Pedro Dominguez, who had a book out at the time, and we ended up talking about self-driving cars because self-driving cars were at the top of the gardener hype cycle. Um, and I actually pulled I I didn't bring them today, but I pulled some of these headlines. And you read these headlines about self-driving cars and what the future of the world is with self-driving cars. And if you get rid of anything about self-driving cars, they sound exactly what people are saying these days about uh generative AI, right? And there's about how many industries are going to be completely changed and uh the the CEOs of all these big companies about how they're going to like um I think I think the GM the GM CEO said, "Oh, we're going to have a million, you know, self-driving cars on the road within 10 years and just all of this stuff." Guess what? It's 10 years later, right? We essentially have zero non-demo self-driving cars on the road. Um, and furthermore, well, back when we were in grad school, I guess you were just done with grad school. Um, in the 80s, there were self-driving cars on the roads on the public roads then, right? In 1995, there was the hands-free across America where a car drove from Pittsburgh to LA and it was like 98% self-driving, right? you know, and here we are in 2025 and we still just have demos of, you know, of Whimos, you know, maybe a thousand Whimo cars out there, you know, >> although to be fair, I I will I I will take a slightly different view, right? Because I rode in a Whimo for the first time in January of this year in San Francisco. >> I felt remarkably safe. >> Yeah. >> Right. It was no I have no demo. >> Yeah. And and to me, urban taxis are crossing that automation frontier into the trust zone, right? And so I would gladly hop in I would gladly right hop into >> by the way and I think actually a lot of the reason no high a lot of the reasons are not um >> are not >> trust are not b not are not because of trust trust is yeah I agree with you that for you know that for slower urban >> exactly because the cost of error is lower right I mean it's it's it's one thing if I slam into something at 30 miles an hour versus 60 or 70 m an hour right the cost of error is much higher which is why urban taxi are becoming acceptable and you know I I would think that they would make their way into New York at some point. >> I have a bet with our colleague uh Panos uh about when about how many uh 10 years probably eight years from now how many uh how many of our uh um cabs uh for higher cars in Manhattan are going to be self self-driving. >> I'm assuming he's more optimistic. >> He's more optimistic. Yeah. I I I you know it's a it's a nice bet, but it hasn't it hasn't moved at all in two years. So I have eight eight years eight years. >> But when it moves I believe the biggest issues are going to be things like like how to deal with pedestrians given that there's no driver and so there's no social compact between the jaywalkers and the you know and the car and you know you know and things like this which will just wreck havoc I think. Anyway, we have um some time left. I thought I wanted >> but hold on. We we haven't gotten to like the the the most interesting part which is >> oh you want to talk about >> will we govern AI or will it govern us right so so to to me that is the most important question facing humanity right and and I say this without any exaggeration at least as far as I'm concerned because I think there are three things that we need to figure out one is do we have any restrictions around AI right is it okay for an AI to come arrest you for non-payment of taxes right? You know, can it do that or should we restrict machines from doing things like that? Right? Should AI have any obligations, right? Should it have any sort of duty of care like humans do or is it okay to turn chat bots into, you know, advisers of mental health, right? Um, you know, is that kind of thing okay, right? Or should we actually have some expectations of AI just like we have with human professionals, right? At the moment, we are driving recklessly, you know, down this road without any guard rails, right? So that's the the second thing. The third thing especially when we get to agents and agentic AI is what kinds of rights do we give the machine right? Um and that's an important question because um you know uh you know as you know let's say a machine starts running a business for you right should it have the rights to should it have a right to hire and fire a board you know and enter into contracts what happens if it renegs on a contract like things like that those are open questions that I end with that I think are pressing that we need to address. Do you think by the way that adapting so we have rules for corporations, we have rules for um the people who can come with maybe some modern exceptions who can come and arrest you um with uh and with um uh and with the uh duty for duty of care that um when people or companies do these things they have to abide by or they you know or whatever. Do you do you think that j that just adapting those is sufficient or no? Um there's reasons why that's not well you know I think for certain kinds of things u existing laws or existing structures or ways of thinking about things are adequate. Um and I I know we're sort of pressed for time and I want to open this up. Uh but for other things we have no guard rails. we and and we really need to think about whether we need new laws you know in this era of AI and my uh you know and and my my thinking is that for a lot of things we do have the framework uh we don't have adequate precedents um but for other things I think we need to rethink whether we need new laws around this new entity that is now occupying this planet with us >> one of the things I found most thoughtprovoking toward the end of the book was um this question uh which I'll adapt a little bit, but it's pretty much the same. The the question, what if I um you know, I'm getting older. I not what if I am, I am getting older, you know, and so I so I I create an AI to manage my affairs. Maybe I create a foundation or or a corporation to take to take care of this stuff. And the AI, let's say AI continues to get better and it gets better and it can manage the thing perfectly perfectly well and I die. Then what? Can the AI just continue to manage my affairs and you know and deal with it and manage the corp the foundation and the corporation and like you know >> especially if you have a lot of money. >> Well, too bad. >> But because that that that that's essential, right? So so one of the Yeah, exactly. And so one of the questions I raise is, you know, would Elon Musk be content with having a foundation run his affairs or would he be more comfortable having a Muskbot >> that thinks like him and will do things just like he would think about it. Right? So that's those are some of the questions I I leave us with because we haven't had to think about these issues so far. We've had foundations, no, but would Rockefeller or Ford be content with the way his money is being managed and spent. Might he be more comfortable with the bot? >> So, let's open it up to some questions. There are mics uh coming around, so if you'll wait for the mic, that'll be that'll be great so that it can be on the recording. >> Thank you. I just wanted to ask that you've um discussed the positive um car uh self-driving, but I've read a few times of how like the cars have crashed. So, how do we know that that's like based on your AI analysis that it's safer? Thank you. >> I'm I'm not entirely sure what the question. How do we know that the cars are actually safer given that they have uh that they both um avoid accidents that would have happened if it had been a human, but they also have accidents that possibly would not have happened uh with a human, which is which is true. I don't know the percent. >> Well, you know, I I think if all the cars on the road were self-driving, there would there's there's no doubt that there'd be a lot fewer accidents, >> right? the date and the data seems pretty clear so far that I'm not an expert in that but seems pretty clear that they're uh >> and I would guess in general if all you know because there's a very wide variance in human skills when it comes to driving right it would be nice if people who don't know how to drive don't drive right >> by the way it's unclear that we really truly know because we haven't had >> you know cars out on the road in you know in you know in um you know New New York traffic for example, you know, so um we don't really know. >> We know they're terrible drivers on the road. >> Yeah, we know that who whoever Yeah. these guys uh these the mic the mic the mic takers get. >> All right, let's go on that side. >> Yeah. So, I actually heard you speak at this event some time ago where you spoke about having digital twins of AI CEOs. Um I I found that pretty interesting and I wanted to ask you how how does governing at a board level where there are board members involved in a company of such size. How does that work and how do you see that working in the future? >> You know I mean that's a great question. I I I had this conversation with Danny Conne may he rest in peace u almost three years ago when I asked him this questions almost as an aside. I thought he'd sort of brush it off, but he said to me, he says, you know, I I think that's very possible and and quite likely, you know, because CEOs have this advantage of having, you know, common sense, a global view and all that kind of stuff, but I I don't see why a machine couldn't have that either. U so yeah, it's not an outrageous question or thought. And that was three years ago. Um now three years later I feel like it's almost like an inevitable reality where we'll see digital twins of people uh who will be sounding boards uh you know just to enable them to have someone who thinks like them about situations right so I I think that's a possibility and maybe like I said almost an inevitability >> yeah just >> one question only please um part of this um initially the thinking with machines part and if if you know about computers um which you do of course uh I was actually a student of yours in 1993 here at Stern so I actually took my first computer course with professor Dar >> um so it's it's a logical machine and it's it's a command base and it's really it's not really thinking it's just executing code right at some point though it seems that AI has jumped to what I would say insight um that moment in the in the shower let's say when you're not thinking and these ideas appear in your head has AI taken that leap where it's not just executing I mean it must be it's a computer right so it must be executing code at all times but where's the insight coming from and is that still missing you know the human insight is not just thinking it's sometimes it's just bam we don't know what it is it's metaphysical it's spiritual it's it's something beyond >> what a great question What what a great question. Um, and this really gets to the heart of like what what is this insight, right? And I don't know the answer, but I can conjecture that a lot of it is about making connections between things you already know uh and then sort of using that to generate something new. Is the machine capable of that? I think so. Right. It's it's because as it learns more and more about everything, right, it becomes capable of that. Now, is it doing that at the moment? I don't think so. Right? At the moment, I don't think it has the curiosity, you know, that the the level of curiosity that humans do. Will it develop that? I think so. Right. I I think I think that's a that's a matter of time where it develops that curiosity, right? because in principle machines are capable of discovering things that humans may not be capable of discovering right and and and so I think it's conceivable it's possible as it starts making making connections now a lot of new theory development is about conjectures and verifying them right conjectures and refuting them right and if the computer has that ability to create conjectures and verify or refute them, right? Then it's doing some of the similar things that humans do. So in principle, I don't see that as being uh an insurmountable obstacle, right? As as machines develop curiosity. >> So it used to be we'd say that um once we figured out how the AI worked, it wasn't really AI anymore, right? Um and so um insight as you as you you know I pointed out it's a lot of it is like well if we don't really understand how in the world we came to that realization then it must be insight because we don't see a logical logical progression and so there's a lot of what current massive neural networkbased AI systems do that we have no idea how it came we have no I mean we know technically and functionally how it worked but we don't really know how it worked in in the in the realm of ideas coming you know coming together. So I think that's one thing and I think a second thing is when we're talking about the the these these these other programs and the logic and the logic flowing right a human wrote that program but the modern AI systems a human didn't write the program another AI system wrote the program wrote the wrote the program that's the brain so a machine learning system writes the LLM the LLM then is the brain inside the AI system Right? And so we sort of have this double source of not really understanding what's going on. One is the thing's too complicated with a trillion parameters or whatever to know what's going on. And second, nobody actually programmed it. You know, a machine program and that machine itself is really really complicated. Okay, for the sake of time, we have um we actually have two people who were there uh at the very beginning. Our friend here in the black, right? And then this gentleman down here in the front was one of the earliest people to to to raise his hand. So you two. Thank you. Um, my name is Elizabeth. I'm an undergrad alumni. Um, thanks professor Dar for giving the really interesting talk. Um, I would love to probe on your perspective around the bifurcated systems where people are thinking with machines and then outsourcing their thinking to machines. I'm wondering if you have any advice on how we all lean into the former where we're leveraging the machines to expand you know humandriven thinking particularly in context of the world we're living in particularly as it is harder and harder to encourage people to have um you know human- centric conversations and I'm wondering if you have any insight as to how we all build the um the human enabled side of thinking. I don't have anything more profound than what Steve Jobs said, you know, which was stay hungry, stay foolish. I would s I would sort of substitute the hungry with curious. By the way, I think he stole that from Kim Jong of North Korea. But you know, but but that's you know and and that's what I you know tell all my students as well, right? Because you know I don't don't get Chachi P2 to write your you know paper for you. Get it use it at the end you know to critique it and push it around but exercise that muscle and that's kind of what it's really all about right it's about all about curiosity and I think the curious will win right they'll stay on the right side of this impending bifurcation. Hey, Vassant. Uh, as you know, um, good to see you. I've known Vassant for a very long time, so it's good to see you up here. Congrats. Um, as you know, I'm a school teacher and I remember you visited my classroom last year. That was a lot of fun. And I wondered if I could shape around a question around um, AI for future generations and sort of guide your thinking along learning with machines as you know, you teach AI and it's it's guided your classroom over the past 30 years. I'm curious um what your takeaways were from that visit around how a kid might think with these tools and and how it might change over the coming years. >> So So thank you for that. And that visit, you know, this was um I think like how old were the kids? Like eight or nine, right? So that's how old they were. And Sean invited me to his classroom to see how they were using Canva and a bunch of other tools and what I thought of the experience. And it was a incredibly enlightening experience to see these kids interacting with AI and you know I was just on a podcast earlier today on education and uh and I interesting on a on a radio you know New Jersey radio in the morning show like a couple of weeks ago where we were talking about similar things like what's the important question facing parents uh and kids and the most important question facing parents is are my kids getting smarter or dumber, right? I mean, that's the simple question, right? And I believe it's answerable, but the answer depends individually on each family, right? It depends on your interaction with your kids when you talk to them. Is it at dinner? Is it when you're taking them to school? What is it? But this is the question that faces parents, right? And can you actually measure this? Right? And it's important to be able to measure this. So in this era, I think engagement of parents with kids is more critical than it's ever been. Right? When I went to school, our parents just sent you to school and you were someone else's problem, right? Yeah. With with my kids and one of them was Sean's classmate, we went to every parent teacher conference, right? We did, you know, because it was the thing to do. But now it's more than that. It's not just going to every P parent teacher conference, but it's about monitoring your children because now there's an alien, you know, along with us who's become an incredibly important part of the learning experience. And the um the goal isn't to like stop them or curb them. It's actually to encourage them to use this technology as opposed to thinking that this is somehow going to pollute their brains. It can, but it's really incumbent on parents to be able to to be to be watching out and answering that question, right? Are they becoming less or more curious? Are they becoming smarter or dumber? >> Okay, so um we still have more time, but more time is going to be downstairs. So, thanks a lot for uh uh for spending time with us and and congratulations on the book finally being done.